README.md, before:

# ScholarSnap

ScholarSnap is an AI-powered research assistant that surfaces the latest research papers from arXiv for a given topic and produces concise, structured summaries using a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline backed by a local LLM (Ollama/Mistral).


## Features & Current State

- **LangGraph workflow**: Conversational orchestration with greeting, topic validation, RAG pipeline, and clarification/error handling.
- **Strict topic validation**: LLM checks if the topic is a valid scientific research topic (including anatomical/medical terms) and prompts for re-entry if invalid.
- **Phrase-based arXiv search**: Only returns papers where the full topic phrase appears in the title or abstract, ensuring high relevance. Backend logs the number of papers detected before and after batch size enforcement for transparency.
- **PDF download node**: Downloads arXiv PDFs to a temporary folder, automatically handles redirects, logs errors, and skips failed downloads.
- **LLM summarization**: Only paper titles are sent to the LLM, which is strictly instructed to output only the provided titles as bullet points. Output is post-processed to guarantee only real, retrieved titles are shown.
- **Modular topic validation**: LLM topic validation logic is now modularized in `llm.py` for maintainability and reuse.
- **Frontend chat UI**: Minimal React app with clear error and clarification handling, showing bot and user messages in a chat layout.
- **Ollama integration**: Uses local Mistral model by default, configurable via YAML.
- **Modular codebase**: FastAPI backend with routers/services, React frontend, and centralized config.


## Repository Structure
```
ScholarSnap/
	frontend/                # React + Vite + Tailwind
	no_papers["No papers found"]
			App.tsx              # Chat UI
			main.tsx
			index.css
		package.json
	rag -- "No papers found" --> no_papers
		tailwind.config.js
	backend/
		app/
			main.py              # FastAPI entrypoint, router registration
			config.py            # Configuration loader from YAML
			langgraph_workflow.py# LangGraph workflow orchestration
			routers/
				health.py          # Health check endpoint
				rag.py             # RAG summary endpoint
			services/
				arxiv.py           # arXiv API integration (phrase search)
				llm.py             # Ollama LLM integration & context building
		config.yaml            # Application configuration
		requirements.txt
	README.md
	LICENSE
	.gitignore
```


## Backend API

### `POST /chat/`
Main conversational endpoint. Accepts a user topic and returns a structured response.

**Request Body:**
```json
{ "message": "<topic>" }
```

**Response Fields:**
- `greeting`: Greeting message (string)
- `topic`: The validated topic (string or null)
- `summary`: Bullet-point list of paper titles, or a message if no papers found (string or null)
- `papers`: List of paper objects (array or null)
- `paper_list`: Bullet-point list with titles and authors (string or null)
- `no_papers`: Message if no papers found (string or null)
- `clarification`: Message if topic is invalid (string or null)

**Response Scenarios:**
- Valid topic, papers found: Returns summary, papers, paper_list
- Valid topic, no papers: Returns summary as "No papers found...", empty papers, no_papers message
- Invalid topic: Returns clarification message, all other fields null

---

### `GET /rag/summary?topic=<topic>`
Retrieves recent arXiv papers for a topic and generates a summary.

**Query Parameter:**
- `topic`: The research topic to search for (string)

**Response Fields:**
- `topic`: The topic queried (string)
- `summary`: Bullet-point list of paper titles, or message if no papers found (string)
- `papers`: List of paper objects (array)

---

### `GET /health/`
Health check endpoint.

**Response:**
```json
{ "status": "ok" }
```

# Backend Workflow (LangGraph)

```mermaid
graph TD
		greet["App waits for user input"]
		typo_check["LLM checks if input is a valid scientific topic"]
		invalid["LLM replies with 'Invalid scientific topic, please try again'"]
		rag["RAG Pipeline: fetch papers from arXiv"]
		paper_list["LLM replies with list of paper titles"]
		no_papers["LLM replies with "No papers found""]

		greet -- "User writes topic of interest" --> typo_check
		typo_check -- invalid --> invalid
		typo_check -- valid --> rag
		rag -- "No papers found" --> no_papers
		rag -- "Papers found" --> paper_list
		invalid --> greet
		no_papers --> greet
```


## Configuration

Configuration is managed via `config.yaml`:
```yaml
ollama:
	url: "http://localhost:11434/api/generate"
	model: "mistral:latest"
arxiv:
	api_url: "https://export.arxiv.org/api/query"
	default_days: 7
	batch_size: 5
```

## Installation & Dev Workflow

### Prereqs
- Node 18+ / pnpm or npm
- Python 3.11+
- Ollama installed locally (with model pulled, e.g. `ollama pull mistral`)

### Frontend Dev
```
cd frontend
npm install
npm run dev
```
Opens: http://localhost:5173

### Backend Dev
```
cd backend
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 8002
```
Open: http://localhost:8002/docs

## License
MIT

---
ScholarSnap is maintained as a demonstration of applied RAG with local inference. Iterative improvements are ongoing.

## Planned Workflow Enhancements: PDF Download, OCR, and Summarization

To deepen paper analysis, ScholarSnap will incrementally add:

1. **PDF Download Node**: After papers are found, download each paper’s PDF (from arXiv) to a temporary folder.
2. **OCR & Summarization Node**: For each downloaded PDF, extract text (using OCR if needed) and generate a summary of findings using an LLM or dedicated summarizer.
3. **Enhanced Response Node**: Reply with a paragraph for each paper, including title, authors, submission date, and summary of findings.

### Implementation Strategy
- **Incremental Development**: Add one node at a time, testing each thoroughly before moving to the next.
- **Error Handling**: Each node will handle errors gracefully (e.g., skip failed downloads, log issues).
- **Fallbacks**: If OCR or summarization fails, fall back to original metadata (title, authors).
- **Testing**: Unit tests for each new function/node.
- **Logging**: Clear logging at each step for debugging.
- **Feature Flags**: Use config flags to enable/disable new features, allowing easy rollback to simpler workflow if needed.

### Example Extended Workflow (Mermaid)
```mermaid
graph TD
	greet -- "User writes topic of interest" --> typo_check
	typo_check -- invalid --> invalid
	typo_check -- valid --> rag
	rag -- "No papers found" --> no_papers
	rag -- "Papers found" --> download_pdfs["Download PDFs"]
	download_pdfs -- "Downloads successful" --> ocr_summarize["OCR & Summarize"]
	ocr_summarize -- "Summaries ready" --> enhanced_response["Enhanced Response"]
```

Commit message:

added user prompt after PDF download and response interpretation

README.md, after:

# ScholarSnap

ScholarSnap is an AI-powered research assistant that surfaces the latest research papers from arXiv for a given topic and produces concise, structured summaries using a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline backed by a local LLM (Ollama/Mistral).


## Features & Current State

- **LangGraph workflow**: Conversational orchestration with greeting, topic validation, RAG pipeline, and clarification/error handling.
- **Strict topic validation**: LLM checks if the topic is a valid scientific research topic (including anatomical/medical terms) and prompts for re-entry if invalid.
- **Phrase-based arXiv search**: Only returns papers where the full topic phrase appears in the title or abstract, ensuring high relevance. Backend logs the number of papers detected before and after batch size enforcement for transparency.
- **PDF download node**: Downloads arXiv PDFs to a temporary folder, automatically handles redirects, logs errors, and skips failed downloads.
- **LLM summarization**: Only paper titles are sent to the LLM, which is strictly instructed to output only the provided titles as bullet points. Output is post-processed to guarantee only real, retrieved titles are shown.
- **Modular topic validation**: LLM topic validation logic is now modularized in `llm.py` for maintainability and reuse.
- **Frontend chat UI**: Minimal React app with clear error and clarification handling, showing bot and user messages in a chat layout.
- **Ollama integration**: Uses local Mistral model by default, configurable via YAML.
- **Modular codebase**: FastAPI backend with routers/services, React frontend, and centralized config.


## Repository Structure
```
ScholarSnap/
	frontend/                # React + Vite + Tailwind
	no_papers["No papers found"]
			App.tsx              # Chat UI
			main.tsx
			index.css
		package.json
	rag -- "No papers found" --> no_papers
		tailwind.config.js
	backend/
		app/
			main.py              # FastAPI entrypoint, router registration
			config.py            # Configuration loader from YAML
			langgraph_workflow.py# LangGraph workflow orchestration
			routers/
				health.py          # Health check endpoint
				rag.py             # RAG summary endpoint
			services/
				arxiv.py           # arXiv API integration (phrase search)
				llm.py             # Ollama LLM integration & context building
		config.yaml            # Application configuration
		requirements.txt
	README.md
	LICENSE
	.gitignore
```


## Backend API

### `POST /chat/`
Main conversational endpoint. Accepts a user topic and returns a structured response.

**Request Body:**
```json
{ "message": "<topic>" }
```

**Response Fields:**
- `greeting`: Greeting message (string)
- `topic`: The validated topic (string or null)
- `summary`: Bullet-point list of paper titles, or a message if no papers found (string or null)
- `papers`: List of paper objects (array or null)
- `paper_list`: Bullet-point list with titles and authors (string or null)
- `no_papers`: Message if no papers found (string or null)
- `clarification`: Message if topic is invalid (string or null)

**Response Scenarios:**
- Valid topic, papers found: Returns summary, papers, paper_list
- Valid topic, no papers: Returns summary as "No papers found...", empty papers, no_papers message
- Invalid topic: Returns clarification message, all other fields null

---

### `GET /rag/summary?topic=<topic>`
Retrieves recent arXiv papers for a topic and generates a summary.

**Query Parameter:**
- `topic`: The research topic to search for (string)

**Response Fields:**
- `topic`: The topic queried (string)
- `summary`: Bullet-point list of paper titles, or message if no papers found (string)
- `papers`: List of paper objects (array)

---

### `GET /health/`
Health check endpoint.

**Response:**
```json
{ "status": "ok" }
```

# Backend Workflow (LangGraph)

```mermaid
graph TD
		greet["App waits for user input"]
		typo_check["LLM checks if input is a valid scientific topic"]
		invalid["LLM replies with 'Invalid scientific topic, please try again'"]
		rag["RAG Pipeline: fetch papers from arXiv"]
		paper_list["LLM replies with list of paper titles"]
		no_papers["LLM replies with "No papers found""]

		greet -- "User writes topic of interest" --> typo_check
		typo_check -- invalid --> invalid
		typo_check -- valid --> rag
		rag -- "No papers found" --> no_papers
		rag -- "Papers found" --> paper_list
		invalid --> greet
		no_papers --> greet
```


## Configuration

Configuration is managed via `config.yaml`:
```yaml
ollama:
	url: "http://localhost:11434/api/generate"
	model: "mistral:latest"
arxiv:
	api_url: "https://export.arxiv.org/api/query"
	default_days: 7
	batch_size: 5
```

## Installation & Dev Workflow

### Prereqs
- Node 18+ / pnpm or npm
- Python 3.11+
- Ollama installed locally (with model pulled, e.g. `ollama pull mistral`)

### Frontend Dev
```
cd frontend
npm install
npm run dev
```
Opens: http://localhost:5173

### Backend Dev
```
cd backend
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 8002
```
Open: http://localhost:8002/docs

## License
MIT

---
ScholarSnap is maintained as a demonstration of applied RAG with local inference. Iterative improvements are ongoing.

## Planned Workflow Enhancements: PDF Download, OCR, and Summarization

## Upcoming Workflow: PDF Processing, Multimodal Extraction, and User Interaction

After downloading PDFs, the user-facing LLM (Mistral) will:
1. Inform the user that downloads were successful and ask if they want to proceed to processing.
2. Interpret the user's response:
   - If positive: proceed to processing.
   - If negative: respond "Ok, we'll stop here" and delete the files.
   - If unclear: ask again for clarification.

### Processing Pipeline (per PDF)
1. Convert the PDF to images (e.g., with `pdf2image`).
2. Use LLaVA (open-source multimodal LLM) to extract text, tables, and figures from each image.
3. LLaVA generates a summary of the findings for each paper.
4. Pass the extracted information and summary to the user-facing LLM (Mistral), which presents a paragraph for each paper to the user.

### Implementation Task List
1. ✅ ~~Update backend workflow to prompt user after PDF download and interpret response (positive/negative/unclear).~~
2. ✅ ~~Implement file deletion logic if user declines processing.~~
3. Integrate `pdf2image` to convert PDFs to images.
4. Integrate LLaVA for multimodal extraction (text, tables, figures) and summarization.
5. Store extracted content and summaries for each paper.
6. Update user-facing LLM logic to present findings as a paragraph per paper.
7. Add error handling and logging for each step.
8. Add unit tests for new functions/nodes.
9. Update configuration to support feature flags for multimodal processing.
